---
title: Out of the Fire
date: 2017-04-22 20:08:00 -07:00
image: "/uploads/Out-of-the-Fire-2-min.jpg"
author: Angie Rodriguez
---

Imagine your home being burned to the ground. You salvage as many items as possible. No time to think, you grab whatever’s in your reach because the fire is ravaging your home with no signs of stopping. Imagine it happening ten-fold, because the fire reached not only you, but your neighbors, your community, your entire region. That’s exactly what took place in 2015, when Calaveras County experienced a devastating fire known as the Butte fire. I had the chance to visit the region, east of Stockton, and speak with a couple of residents in the city of Angels Camp. These residents in particular, Monika and Suzanne, are also leading an effort to heal the community through their company Manzanita Writer’s Press, a non-profit publishing organization. They have a Kickstarter campaign for anthology project 

*embed video here*

<iframe width="480" height="270" src="https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/100235310/out-of-the-fire-anthology/widget/video.html" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"> </iframe>

“Often times the stump will burn from the rim fire, there were loggers that were logging a, a stump, in a tree, 2 years later, and there was still flame inside the middle and hot embers.” -Monika 

“This was our individual chap book that we produced, um, and published for the community, um, along with a project called the pieces project, the pieces, and the vignettes, are the pieces, that could, the larger 3 dimensional pieces that could not be placed on the commemorative wall, the wall was mosaic and um there are pictures of it in here. That’s one of them. Then we had writers write to individual sets that they picked and wrote to and called to them. and They had no idea the story behind these objects and then they wrote the creative pieces to it of prose and poetry, and so....That, that will be apart of our larger anthology, we’re going to take at least most of them and incorporate that into the larger work. ” –Monika 

**Do you think you can tell me from both of your experiences, what the Butte fire was all about in Calaveras County?**

It was a very uh, destructive fire, they said it was the 7th most destructive in California to date. Many people left homeless, um Thousands of people evacuated, uh many have not returned to their homes. There are no homes. the property is layed waste, um there’s a rebirth of greenery and flowers and things like that, but most of the pines will not come back, the ponderosas, um the oaks, some of the oaks, maybe retained um life. But Basically it was a very hot hot fire, about 4,000 degrees in some places enough to melt ceramic, and um melt metal, cars, uh you could take say aluminum, and it made a liquid and it would run down and you could see, just a very destructive fire that displaced, um people and mainly the western side of our county. Mc combly hill area, uh railroad flat, west point were not as affected but they all had to evacuate, glenn coe area, kind of made a line there and Mountain ranch was heavily impacted, which is where I live. The center of town was saved by ranchers and people who lived there, but San Andreas and other surrounding areas were also evacuated and burned, and so about 70,000, 71,000 acres in total so it was a large swath. Many people don’t see that driving through our county because the main highways do not traverse, the burned areas, so you’re off the beaten path and go to the remoter areas where many people had their homes, uh In these sanctuary areas that we just love, the general public won’t see it, so uh unless you choose to go there, If you go to California Caverns, for instance, mountain ranch, you’ll see all the way through most of the drive, you’ll see the destruction there. so the caverns were spared. and So for the people whose homes were spared, they’re having the bureacy of trying to, and,... and also the emotional content, whether they should come back or not. The community is not as it was, what happens in a time like that you would think people would want to come back and rebuild and many of them would have except for the time frame and the destruction was so complete that getting permits, and the cleanup of the site was unprecedented. They were trying something with the cleanup method that they would try to get—take all that soil out of there with the toxins and the burned chemicals and clean that area, get the soil out and Replace it with good soil so that A child— basically it had to be so clean that a child could eat off— could eat the dirt and not have a reaction, and that was unprecedented what they did. And it’s a good thing, you know, but it took a lot of time, and so, many people in the meantime, were grappling with their insurance companies, and many of them had structures that were substandard, they were grandfathered in maybe they weren’t permitted,—many of them weren’t insured so quite a loss for them, living intense and today there are still many of them. It hit pretty hard, 

And for us, we formed this center about a month after the fire, in a weird twisted, maybe desire to create something after the destruction. So we wanted a place to preserve the art, where we felt pretty confident it wouldn’t burn. Although, Angels Camp had to be evacuated, parts of angels camp and murphys and. All the way up to Arnold. they were all under evacuation orders so that fire had it not been stopped right before murphys…. Had they not stopped it there, it would have gone all the way up through to Sonora, tul county it would have kept on going, it was that fierce so it would have devastated all these communities. But they stopped it there and there was also a day or so of rain, light rain that helped, kind of a divine intervention at that point.

Manzanitas Writers Press was here before the fire, correct?

Oh yeah, we’ve been in operation as a press since 2009. And before that as a writers group who was publishing works since 1984. We were situated in San Andreas. And then we found this location and made this our center.

How did the idea for the anthology really come about? Like who started it?

I think what happened was that we have Monday meetings for the writers group for writers unlimited. The first and third Mondays are in the daytime. The second and fourth Mondays are in the evening -Suzanne

And I think what happened was that people were coming to our meetings and saying “I need to write about this, I have to write about what it did for my, for my family, for my situation” And we had this group of people who just needed to tell their story. so of course we said “Come in, sit down, do what you need to do. write whatever it is that youre feeling.  is it recollection?, [is it] a memorial?” all different kinds of writing: poetry, prose, photography, art. And we thought—did we initially think about the print anthology? I think it grew from there—and what we did was we organized the blog and people sent their writing to us, and we just looked at it to make sure that it was appropriate for all audiences, put that onto the blog, and then we said “what are we going to do for the first-year anniversary of the fire of september 2016?” And we came up with the idea of the print anthology. So it will be a magnificent collection of people writing to people of the community. it’s a truly community project, yes there are professional writers, published writers who have been involved with the project, but we have people who have never thought before to put pen to paper about their experiences as a way to let the community know that so many people are in the same kind of situation. What strikes me most about it, is we have people writing things from extremely different points of view. We have people who have lost their property, their buildings burned to the ground, their land is wasted, it’s no good anymore. And then we have writers who have written about yes the forest is burned but their actual home was saved but they’re both grappling with the same kind of loss. And not only is it about the loss but it’s also about the rebuilding. –Suzanne

You see the people who moved up here love the forest and the forested area they, and yes we’re supposed to clear, and many did, a hundred feet etcetera, but you move to the forest because you love the habitat, you love the trees, you love nature, you love the animals. That very love doesn’t go away after the fire. but You’re wondering, you’re reexamining “where can I go that’s safe, where can i go in this environment, that i feel i can recreate that feeling?”, well many of them are fearful you know that, that it will happen again. Fires are going to be with us over and over and over. when we moved up here we were building our home and The Old Gulch fire started right over our hill. right on the other side. First experience with fire, but that one was really close and very scary. We thought, we weren’t even finished building, threw everything in the truck, Since then I would say that about 15-16 fires within a 3 mile radius of my home, over about a 30 year period. That’s like one in every 2 years that’s serious enough within that radius to make me wonder. and Even after this one, we had one, the willow fire off of willow creek road. where a woman was driving on a metal rim.and sparks were going off and she was setting several fires going up the road  and i thought my gosh here we’ve gone through the one and we survived And now 300 acres away is another one, and so they they saved a lot of homes. but It’s inevitable, and what we want to celebrate in this book is the love of the place, the love of the landscape, and why people really find it hard to leave. there’s not enough housing for many of them here that would like to stay. They’re in limbo right now. and this is about what almost coming at, what a year and a half ? after the fire. And they’re still in limbo, they’re not quite sure what they’re going to do and then the community has changed. It’s attracted a very avarice industry that would like to, it’s a cannabis growing industry that has come in and over taken a lot of the properties. it’s great for them, it’s cleared and ready to go and we’ve been overwhelmed by it, and it’s not the community it was and people don’t want to return because of the element. The Criminal element, and just the smell and the nuisance, and the lack of regulation or the lack of, the desire to live near that kind of a thing, so they’re rethinking whether they want to return so that’s decimating a community and yet it was allowed to occur. Taking advantage of a disaster, the industry came in, from all over and took advantage and so, many people are angry about that, and other things the loss of our trees to the bark beetle infestation is huge, that is insult to injury. so Millions of trees in our forest are dying from the bark beetle infestation, making it weak and ready for another fire, wherever. But anyway we wanted to celebrate just the love of the place, and the sadness, but also maybe some strategies and working through the sadness and the loss which is people writing and reading and expressing things that they may not be able to express so really reaches to the heart in many of these writings, and make it a permanent record.  One thing we’d like to do is on our website and our blog is to continue to have people to submit and We’re going to set up links to articles all over about the butte fire so it’ll be a receptacle for history, it’ll be a historic living thing, and people can continue to add to it, their stories when they feel ready. many people are not ready to talk yet, they’re not ready to let go and to express themselves yet, many are getting close, time is, time is behind them now, but it’s still very sensitive. –Monika

It’s also can be a way to renew or to rebuild a community because People read and connect with other peoples’ stories and so they can form whole new communities, built on a disaster, and as Monika said the historical record of it is very important because fire is a way of, it’s part of our background. I live about 26 miles down the road, and when I get up in the morning i look out my back window which overlooks a lake and every time I see a fire I get a little bit jittery. It doesn’t go away. because i remember the day I saw the beginning of the fire, i was coming from lodi, i was almost at berson, i saw this cloud in the air that looked gorgeous but also looked evil, i said there’s something wrong going as i was driving home. it is the anthology, the community support, The blog, they all come together to form new communities, that we may not have known each other, now we do-Suzanne

Would you say then that the biggest theme you see in submissions and in the community would be fear?

No, no. -suzanne

No, it’s like a renewal, it’s a wisdom, a renewal of faith in nature, i think and maybe even  a coming to terms with the power of nature, whether it be good or bad, and to take the self out of it, in many ways and to look at the bigger picture. I think people are, they’re using this instrument, i think to settle with themselves, and to make it ok and to heal, like animals go under a bush and lick their wounds. This is hopeful to cleanse the wound, and to heal it over. so It’s become an instrument, I think of great relief to many people. We’ve had people who’ve lost everything have written in here. There are those who didn’t lose everything but feel guilty that they didn’t lose everything and that their neighbors and friends lost everything and  Many people have had to have counseling because of this. it’s been just very hard on them Maybe, I think it hit the elderly the hardest because losing everything that you’ve put your life into. You’re at that point in life where you can’t start over, you can’t physically build a home again you’re in your 60s, your 70s, your 80s. you’re tired and Just the energy of it you can’t bear it. So many of them are making lifestyle changes, forced upon them a little earlier than what they thought, so they’re settling with a different way of looking at life. Eschewing their possessions as not being as important as they thought they were.  I just spoke to somebody Saturday, she was a collector. All of the furniture and the belongings and the collectibles she had. She said “you know, I just bought this jacket at the thrift store, my clothes were very important to me, and now, my jacket’s from the thrift store, and I don’t care. In a way I feel just fine. I’m no longer the caretaker for all these important items. I don’t go out and purchase things like I used to, with the thought that I need to have. ” –monika

Another thing that struck me about this collection. It’s almost been a lucky thing, that people found this anthology. we have many stories of memories of the past, things that are destroyed by the fire. Who were part of those objects. So it’s a way of collecting their memories. It’s something . People up here are not fearful, they don’t get scared. But They’re intentional. We get to be a little bit Independent of nature, and this is our environment part of nature part of the environment. –Suzanne

The anthology is just one project and the blog is more of a permanent project.

It’s going to be in perpetuity, the website whatever technological form, um it will continue all the links to any stories, tell us their story, you know even after years have past, and the historical society will probably keep that for us in perpetuity. –monika

The way history should be recorded. It records it as the event happens, it is it’s a project that is serving the community, our mission is to sustain the arts and literature, and the visual arts  this anthology in particular fits into that mission. It’s a coordinated effort People’s response, for as long as everyone’s still here. –suzanne

There will be more fires, and people can come to this site  maybe they can help themselves prepare, in retrospect that day that the fire began my husband had just brought back. we had to evacuate some of them, but the others had to stay they were all pregnant. and a pregnant cow. So here we had this dilemma, we have this wonderful text thread, just the way they communicated with me, and they wanted to name them after their crew, yeah they have your back. But it was very difficult for them Working in certain conditions, some houses they had to let go, they couldn’t save those houses. And because the water tanks were there. It’s important to have a supply of water. Those are things that people you have to think differently about live in the outback.

Could you explain a little bit more about the literary event

With the literary release of the pblication. We’ve invited Dana we coupled that with our launch of the anthology. So We have a celebratory time when they can do that and it will be at the Angels camp museum and that’s on June 17th. We’re inviting everyone to come. It’s free They’re will be hordeurs . the challenge is we have 60 days, and as of today 29, over 50 56 percent, the word is out and we’ve had so many generous people, who believe in the project we are excited about that  -monika

That people who years ago never thought that their writing would be heard in a public arena.  –Suzanne.

I would say, what half,  half of the writers, or more than half, they’re not writers who thought they were writers “oh I can’t write or you I can’t do this”

People here have stories to tell, we’ll have people who come into the gallery, and we’ll find out because I would say 99 percent of people have a story to tell that they haven’t put into order yet.

We just got a nice grant from the Calaveras Foundation voices of wisdom, some of those stories, we’ll be recording for posterity as well an anthology, so that’s coming up after the Butte fire so we’re busy with stories to tell, that’s our mission.

Has it become your mission statement from your initial formation?

We’ve always collected people’s writings, and had the goal of putting them into anthologies, we always collected stories that reflected our region. we also produce books and would like to get their book published. We have Mark twain’s 88 days in the mother lode. We published glenn “Too much to swallow” A lot of selections. The racing circuit of California. We just put out a novel. The second book is going to becoming out  we’re kind of on a role. 

We’re a multi-county arts organization and a publisher 5, 6 counties and the surrounding counties. We cover a large area. And we’re a regional publisher, small publisher we like to help people find grants and help them support projects. Many of our writers come up from Stockton, Sacramento all from all over.

What would you

Oh the message is just go there and pledge and they can even pldge 10 dollars, to get a book its’ 25 dollars. And you’ll get a listing So we encourage them to consider disaster in their own community is their an instrument . And to be apart of. We embrace The goal that we  have set for ourselves. So we are seeking funding from all different arenas The kickstarter is our focus and they will be publicly acknowledge as at the event they will be there forever.

For more information…

If they go to kickstarter.com they can look for our project they’ll find it right away. There is a beautiful phoenix rising artwork button they can read. 

the image if they look closely it’s a multimedia image. And if you look at it There are forks and implements .underneath that are representative and thse are actual implements. Taking from a friend’s hom she’s not aware that her home is burned. And those objects they transcend our life here.  So It’s in that artwork. So it’s not arbitrary at all.”

