---
title: Quarry
date: 2017-04-10 14:55:00 -07:00
---

Matt biked into the forest under the last light of autumn — leaves and bark burning. The smell signaled war.
He pedaled along the tree line, past the lonely playground in the field, and turned into an opening between some bushes. The swings and slides were called Cheska Park, and so too the trees Matt passed through, the field that lay ahead, the sparse clumps of trees in between and the final, dense stretch of growth that bordered a shopping center. The quasi-forest was not public land, and the signs said so. TRESPASSERS WILL BE PROSECUTED.  He pushed through the bush that blocked one field from the other, and started down the path that would take him towards his destination — deeper into the field where the clumps of trees were most dense.
He hoped whoever’s fort was burning had escaped, and that this fire was not the one to bring the whole forest to ash.
-It’s not even a forest — just some trees. Jackie’s voice rang through Matt’s thoughts.
No one had died or been seriously injured yet. A few kids had been burned badly, mostly the ones who started fires, and no longer came to play the great game in the forest. The fires had lapped up their skin - left scars they were proud of - but they quit after learning that burn-pain subsides long after the first hospital visit. Matt had no idea how they explained why they came home from playing at the park needing hospital visits. 
                                                        		*
	“If you help us, we’re sure to win. We’ll have the numbers,” Gary had said.
 	Matt was against escalating the wars, though not the wars themselves. Every war brought in a steady flow of materials from kids who sold their stuff to him in exchange for other materials. He could profit if he stayed out of it.
	“War’s no good for business,” said Matt, as he turned his back on Gary to count his dandelions. 
Before the kids learned to use fire, wars looked more like a game of dodgeball with spears, Matt remembered. The 13th Battle of Cheska, the one Gary had tried to draw him into, was a classic. The belligerents, in this case Jackie’s empire vs. a coalition of kids who didn’t want the balance-of-power upset with the taking of another fort, lined up along a mutually perceived boundary in the middle of the field. They all had long wooden sticks with sharpened tips at the end, and one or two had a bow and arrow made from a bendable twig and a rubbery vine that grew on the weeping willows.
 Jackie yelled, “Attack!” and her allies — kids she’d conquered who still wanted to play — heaved their sticks as one, catching the coalition by surprise, who melted away into various hiding spots like roaches hiding from the light, thought Matt, safe from the battle in his neutrality. He never witnessed any close combat. No one ever ran up close enough to stab or be stabbed, which made the battles kind of boring once you’ve seen a hundred of them. After all the coalition kids scattered, Jackie walked up and planted her spear in the ground just beyond her conquest, outlining the new extent of her territory, while her allies ran forward into the abandoned fort. One kid came out with an armful of dandelions, and another hacked at logs that were lined up as a roof, while the rest of her gang went back to working in whatever fort of Jackie’s they managed. That victory meant Jackie controlled more territory than the rest of the kids put together.
                                                           	            *
Matt biked further down the path through the field, until he was overcome by wild grass and was forced to dismount. He walked up to the second line of trees that were parallel to the first one, and carefully maneuvered his bike over the wooden bridge that had continued the path over the creek since before this generation of Racinians built their forts. You could tell there were others by the ruins they left behind. Buried litter, fire pits, ancient beer cans. As he moved beyond the wild trees that grew sideways, the field where most of the forts were built came into view, and the smell of smoke grew stronger. He still couldn’t find the source. He walked his bike past forts where kids were hard at work, chopping at bush, collecting and stashing dandelions, or simply hanging out.
        	Each fort had a large tree in the center, though sometimes they were chopped down to create a loft. The bush around the tree was cleared out to give the owner a doughnut of space to move around in, which extended until the bush became too thick to rip up. The trees grew this way after the company that owned the field bulldozed their property in preparation for a quarry, but they let it sit fallow for decades. Crooked trees and wildflowers sprang up and expanded like wild oases across the grass. There really was no forest, only clumps of growth, but each fort was constructed in an epicenter from which wilderness was sparked and natural territory reclaimed by the slow onslaught of nature.
                                                                    	*
-There’s no strategy, Matt had said last week at the meeting of fort owners. We need to have rules.
The 13 owners stood or squatted around an iron drum that marked what they guessed to be the center of the field, which was a no man’s land where wars were staged or peace declared. Ages varied from 11 to 14, all in war paint, dirt streaked across their cheeks, cargo shorts bulging, loaded with sharpened sticks. Matt’s knife he’d carved himself - with his Father’s real knife - was stowed in his hoodie’s front pocket, and he squeezed it while they debated. Jackie stood tallest, and her iconic staff with a red white and blue ribbon was slung by knotted vines across her back, and poked out from behind her black pony tail. Many of the kids present had been playing at forts since before there was any competition - when they built spaces to call their own.
The full early-evening moon gave light to their meeting.
-There’s no rules in war, Jackie said, and the other boys and girls giggled as if this was a logic they had all acquired long ago.                                                   	
 -Well, offered Matt, scratching his head. You aren’t supposed to kill medics. That’s against the rules in real war.
-We don’t have doctors, said a kid Matt saw most days but did not know.
-But it’s not even fun this way. Every fort is vulnerable.                                                  -Not if you keep watch on it.   
Matt sighed. Everyone knew there was school, extracurriculars, dinner with the family, but if he said this they would know when he was open to attack. All a kid had to do was skip school, and he wasn't going to give them the idea. The group muttered before they were silenced when Jackie spoke.
-I’ll be using fire, because I know even if we ban it now some of you assholes will use it, and I’m not going to sit around peacefully and wait for my fort to get torched.
A few of the kids muttered agreement and nodded. Matt rolled his eyes.
-If you’re not having fun you can go home, she continued with a smirk. All in favor of allowing for fire as an act of war raise your hands.
Half of the boys and girls shot their hands up, and the other kids slowly raised their hands as they saw the majority. We should have done this with our eyes closed, thought Matt.
-That settles it.
-On to the next order of business. The new kid, uhh… Alberto, wants a fort, but he doesn't know where to go, said one of the older kids.
-He can have whatever open patch he wants. There’s a million.
-He can’t have one by me.
-Or me.
-Let’s just give him a space after the second creek said Matt, bored with the proceedings.
-Whatever. That’s super far away from the rest of us, but he’ll deal with it.
                               *
The new way of war emerged from an accident. A kid named Richard, known to have an ample allowance to spend on nails, wooden planks, a hatchet, and a hammer, built himself a fire with which to make fire-arrows. He’d stolen the concept from a video game. The kid rubbed WD-40 on the end of a homemade arrow, and dipped it into the fire until the sharp tip managed to hold a flame. He knocked his bow, fashioned from sticks and a rubbery vine that could be found in the trees, and sent the arrow over his fort towards the next one over. He was supposed to have an alliance with that kid, but the test was necessary.
The arrow flew about two feet before being buffeted back by the wind, which fed the flames that sputtered back at Richard’s feet, lighting the dry grass where the can of WD-40 lay. The kid was then said to have booked it before the pressurized can exploded. The idiot could have just kicked the can away.     	                                                                                	
                                                        		
                            *
The bright orange flames licking the white clouds. Smoke billowing white to grey. Black char snaking up the trunk. Leaves tumbling like a rapid autumn. Burning confetti. The flames. The flames sparkling and glistening against a blue sky. Gorging on the dried grass - the bonfire reflected in the eyes of a dozen kids.
